All right. Thank you everybody. This is
the town of Andover uh Board of Finance
special meeting for Wednesday, May 7th.
Uh in reference to the uh budget year
for 2025 2026. Um I think as you all
know the budget failed at referendum uh
yesterday. So as per the charter uh we
will
uh continue to work on the budget as the
board of finance. Our job is to come up
with the recommended budget. The budget
will be bifurcated into two pieces which
is the um town budget and the AES budget
per the per the town charter section
803. So that's uh what this meeting is
all about to further that
process. Um so we have a very simple
agenda tonight. We uh will go ahead and
call the uh meeting to order. So we'll
call the meeting to order. Looks
like 701 started and recite the pledge
of allegiance. So I pledge allegiance to
the flag United States of
America for which it stands one nation
under God
indivisible for all. Thank you. So the
first order of business is public speak.
Um, so we will go around uh to each
member of the public as we can identify
them on the Zoom meeting. Um, and just
ask again that you if you have anything
to add, you certainly don't need to, but
if you have anything that you'd like to
comment on, um, please feel free. Uh,
try to keep your points brief. Um, and
again, if you want to just, I guess,
positively comment on what somebody else
has said or agree with them, just say
that instead of restating the point,
just for the sake of efficiency. So,
uh, Eric, I'm just going to go ahead and
go according to my um screen. So, I have
Sarah Becker, but I'm guessing it's not
Sarah there. Yes, it's uh Eric Becker.
Can you guys hear me? Okay.
Uh, do you have comments or no? Yes. I'm
just making sure you guys can hear me.
Yeah, I wanted to um introduce myself.
I'm Eric Becker and the vice chair of
the board of education. Uh Kayn
Greenhouse, the chair of the board of
education asked for me to for for me to
speak for her tonight um as she's unable
to attend. Um regarding the referendum,
we wanted to mention that we we respect
the voter's thoughts. It was a very
clear result, close result uh but it's
clear the community believes that the
elementary school budget um is too high.
Uh we know you have to make adjustments
and we hope you strike a balanced
approach. One thing we wanted to note is
um we saw that he passed their
elementary school budget which had a 5%
increase. Uh we hope any changes that
you make will ensure that the budget
gets passed in the second goound here.
Um and we as a board will continue to
advocate for our students and our
growing population. Um, and we continue
to ask for your support. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you,
Eric. Okay. Going around in order. Jeff
McGuire, I see you next.
Hi. How is everybody? Can you hear me?
Yep. We can hear you. Um, listen, I I
wanted to I apologize for not making the
town meeting. I was uh I was traveling.
I really wish I could have made that
meeting.
Um, I have a couple points for you guys
that I just want to make sure that we're
we're all good with. One is that, um,
you know, the board of finances role is
to really establish the amount of money
that can be spent by the community. Um,
that includes the board of education and
the the the town government. So, um, you
know, you really can't tell uh the board
of education how to spend its money. you
can just tell the board of education how
much money it has to spend and it's the
same way related to the town, the same
position that the board of finance is
in. Um, that's that's the main point
that I wanted to sit there and address
to the board. And then some points that
I just want everybody to think about as
we move forward. Um, I know the board of
finance or the last closed fiscal year,
the board of education had a $400,000
under spend. That underspend was moved
into the AES capital fund, which we all
know is needed because there's a
bathroom repair at the school that needs
to get
accomplished. But that goes to my
financial side of my brain that sits
there and says if they were underfunded
by $400,000 in that fiscal year and were
adding another $400,000 on top of that,
that's an $800,000 increase from the
previous, you know, not this current
fiscal year, but the previous fiscal
year. and how did we get to that number?
That's a an extremely large number. Um,
I'm going to go to the other part that's
that's had me considering and thinking
about what we've doing is community. The
prek program that was established in the
community probably about five or six
years ago has always been uh expressed
would be self-funded. So that means no
tax dollars would be spent on the prek
program. Um, so if grant funding has
decreased, that would mean to me that
tuition should increase. And I'm not
sure that we have all of the information
necessary to sit there and deal with
that from a board of education
standpoint, but it is something that I
do think the board of finance should be
sitting there looking at. And and then
my last thing is is really that, you
know, it's really important for the town
to balance its priorities, all of its
fiscal priorities. Um, you know, the
funding of AES is critical to the
long-term success of our of the town of
Andover as a community, and we need to
understand that. Um, but you also have
to realize that once budgets are set,
it's incredibly difficult to make them
go down. And I hope that we sit there
and go backwards and we're we're
considerate of all of the issues, but we
have to be considerate of all the issues
and the balancing the what is important
for the town as we move forward. So I
know you guys have a difficult job. I
hope we're all respectful in this
process because it's really important
that you know we understand the value of
AES and the value of what the board of
education does for our community. And uh
I'll leave it to you guys and hopefully
we get the next budget passed. So,
thank you. Thank you, Jeff.
All right. Thanks. I have Diane Grineer.
Yes. I I'd just like to say uh good luck
to you all and Godspeed.
Thank you, Diane. Uh Valerie Bern,
thank you. Mark, can you hear me? Yep.
Okay. Sorry. Um, so yes, it was very
difficult yesterday. We did see 53% of
the people versus 46% of the people with
yeses and nos. It was pretty pretty
tight. Uh, I guess there in terms of uh
the yeses and the nos and I do know that
we've looked at the questions and we do
see that there are a fair number of
people on both sides that think that the
town budget is too high and that think
that the school budget is too high. And
it is a tough job. you guys have. Um I
would like to speak just for a second to
I do know that um the town um last year
uh had a lot of needs and they did
receive 16% increase over the year
before which means this year even with a
0% increase they would be receiving 16%
over the year before two years ago. I do
know that our audit is almost complete
for the town and yes, the town um I mean
the school did have um unexpended funds
from last year due to a number of
factors um including uh changes to
students and special education. Um I do
know that the town was also grateful
enough uh last year and the year before
to have a surplus as well. Uh those two
years combined were um $400,000 on the
town side as well according to the
audit. So thankfully both the town has
been great with spending and the school
and with all of the other reserves that
have been given to both of them the
forms of grants. So both have had
surpluses in the past two years. Uh
that's not a sign of underfunding.
That's a sign of changes that occur
during the course of the year. It is not
over or underfunding. Um things that
were changed during the course of the
year. As for preschool, um I know that
there are seats on the school readiness
council. Uh one includes the first
selectman. Um if the first selectman
were to attend those meetings, I wish
this year we would get a better picture
for everybody in the town of exactly how
that funding occurs for school
readiness, which will be called
something else this year. But um it is
in fact a fact that there is not a
meager amount of tuition that comes in.
there's $6,000 from each family that
comes in and you will not see those
salaries from preschool that are in the
budget. Uh they don't exist. They are
funded separately through school uh
readiness. So, um moving forward, I know
you guys have a tough job, but I do
think that 46% to 53% last night showed
that there are a lot of people in town
concerned about the budget on both sides
and that it's not just a school thing.
So, thank you so much
Okay, thank you Valerie. Um,
moving on. I see Scott Pan.
Good, Mark. Thank you.
Okay, thank you Scott and Cre.
It's not just an Yeah, yeah, I see you
there. I couldn't see you, so I'm just
going by the name on the screen.
I know and we we haven't figured out how
to change it. Uh I also had Julia Havl
with me uh to help her with the
technology. I just want to say I was
very disappointed in the results of last
evening. Um I was curious to know how
much my taxes would have gone up had
that passed. So I looked at my I
calculated my taxes for this year that I
just finished paying. Um, and that was
$11,5944. Then I calculated with the new
mill rate and that came out to
$11,386.38. It was a matter of maybe
$327 a
year. I don't know that people are
looking at the money and exactly how
does it impact them. Um I I get and I
really don't know that this budget is
about money. Uh when I saw that flyer in
the River East on Friday, it was full of
lies and
falsehoods. And it was it was really, as
far as I'm concerned, it was scandalous.
There's no truth in it. And I think that
the board of education and the town got
a bad rap out of that. And uh I I mean
the people that work for our town,
whether they're teachers or in the
school or they're people working on the
roads, I mean, you got to you got to pay
people today to living wage. And you're
not going to be able to hire people if
you don't have the money to hire them
with. And I think that our town deserves
better. And I mean, I'm willing to pay
an increase of that much a year. It It's
not that I don't think it's that fierce,
but that's just my own opinion. and God
bless you all and I appreciate your work
you do and you can go on to the next
word. Do you have anything to say? Yeah,
I was just going to say that with those
questions that were along with the
budget vote the you think the budget for
the town or for the school was too much,
too little or just right. Um, I really
don't know how accurate those are, how
much of a representation they are of
towns people because they they don't add
up to the number of votes, the number of
people that came in to vote. Um, when
the questions about the town budget came
up
to
639 people voting and that we didn't
have that many people come in to vote.
So people must have voted for more than
one thing saying it was both maybe too
much and just right or something like
that. So I don't think you can put a lot
of stock in those answers that people
did because the numbers don't add
up. I was shocked by the fire in the
river east.
I thought it was designed to be
inflammatory and get people upset. I
would have liked to have seen uh
documentation of who was responsible for
it.
Um and I can't believe that the school
board has a million dollars. I mean,
anybody in their right mind is going to
say that can't be possibly be right
because it stated that there was a
million
dollars surplus in the board of ed
coffers, but apparently
uh whoever wrote it didn't take into
effect. are the numbers for the school
board are checked regularly by a
um auditor and certainly that wouldn't
happen. The people who put the budget
together and the people and the majority
of people on our boards and commissions
take their jobs
seriously and do their job with good
faith in the kind of government they'd
like to see and the kind of people they
know that their neighbors would like to
see. So the whole thing was a bad move I
think and it created a very sour note on
the whole thing.
Yeah, I you know I just want to say this
is not this should really be discussion
about the flyer. I get that it generates
a lot of uh feelings. I didn't
personally read it. Not interested. Um
and so you know that that's just me
though. But I this is really about what
we need to do moving forward. So I would
I don't want to I don't want to stop a
public comment. It's important. But I do
think we should keep focused on the on
just the your your input about towards
the budget itself. Hey Mark, it's Joanne
and I'm sorry to to interrupt you and I
always appreciate your you know the way
you run a meeting as well. I always say
that to you but I don't mind if they
touch on it a little bit if they want
to. I I do agree that this meeting is
you know we're going to be deciding on
the budget or our next proposed budget.
But if I think if towns people take the
time, I always say this, I love when
they take the time to come to a meeting
and if they have an opinion, you know,
as long as they don't go on and on. I
agree. But we need to stay focused on
the budget, not on a flyer, on an
article. Right. Right. I mean, you did
right. I just want to say that I always
appreciate this is why I love to serve
on a board. I don't need everybody to
agree with me or or whatever, but I do
want to hear just a little bit. But if
if you feel like they're going on and
on, then by all means. Well, it's not so
much that. I just want to stay on topic.
Sure. Got it. Thank you. I just wanted
to give my two cents. Yeah. If I could
say uh Bill, I would just like to
include that I do think the flyer is on
topic. Um sorry to disagree with you,
Mark, because I normally agree with you
on everything, but I believe that this
budget didn't pass because of this
flyer. It is full of misinformation and
lies, and it's slanderous. It is
cowardly that the people who wrote this
didn't even put their name. I'm sorry,
but they didn't put their name on it.
They said things about you, Mark. They
said things about Caitlyn. They said
things about Valerie. All of these
things are slanderous and they have no
basis in this type. You want to put out
facts on your opinions. Okay, that's one
thing. But slanderous information like
this, there's no place for it. The
people that put this out should be
ashamed of themselves. And I believe
they are ashamed because they didn't put
their name on it. So that tells me
they're ashamed of what they did and
this stuff has no place in this town. I
can't believe this actually happened.
But it did affect the outcome of this
election. Mark, this piece of paper
right here did and it was wrong and it's
full of wrong information. So I'm
embarrassed for that and I'm embarrassed
for the things I said about you, about
Caitlyn, and about Valerie. It was
wrong.
So anyways, people, you know, when I
think about the job that you've done for
many years, Mark, not fair. When I think
about Valerie, she was hired to do a
job, educate her kids. She wants the
best education for her kids. She's doing
the best she can. And her reward for
that is people slandering her name.
Okay. She's got no place in this in this
agenda, but I think it is important to
say that this was a bad piece that
affected the outcome of the budget. So,
all right. Well, let's let's get back to
public comment if we could.
So, appreciate it. So, um moving along,
if we would. Um, I have a Terry
Smith. Any input? Yes, thank you, Mark.
Um, Mr. D. Rogers, thank you so much for
stating what you just did. When I saw
that flyer, I was so upset and Valerie
and I were very upset about it. Um, it
is totally um,
inaccurate. the numbers were all wrong
and I am I I just want I don't want to
dwell on it but I just wanted to say
that we are all upset about it and it
it's just such a slap in the face. Um I
hope that we can um get a fair budget
for both sides for both the town and the
board of ed and
um and I and I'll do whatever the board
of ed and Valerie need me to do. Thank
you.
Okay, thank you Terry. Uh have Marcy
next.
Hi. Um actually I I think it I think it
would be important for the board of
finance to discuss the flyer because you
know some people are saying it's not
factual and apparently the person who
did it thinks that it is and uh it it
does make a big difference. I mean, if
you if you look at a possible surplus
that they already have of 900,000 and
then increasing the budget, uh that
their operating budget is 3.5 million,
but they're asking for 4.5 million. Um
I'm not sure, but I would like to know
because if you add those up, it sounds
like they're overbudgeted by 2 million.
So that's pretty significant. Um, and so
if if we're if the flyer is wrong, I'd
like to know. I mean, I think that it
would be important to, you know, instead
of sitting there waving your hand and
saying I think it's wrong, maybe it is
right, maybe it is wrong. It would be
nice to know.
Um, and uh, you know, there's
also I get concerned when I hear uh, you
know, parents say that, uh, seniors
don't care about kids. Uh, and that's
why they voted vote these budgets down
because they don't care. Well, there
nothing could be further from the truth.
Uh, the reason why these budgets don't
pass is because there's no
um there's no transparency. You know,
you hear things about the preschooler
parents paying
$6,000 and we're paying $23,000. I mean,
what's where's the difference? So, you
know, there's a lot of there's a lot of,
you know, hard feelings and I think that
it's important that you address all of
these things factually so that we can
make an informed decision. I know it's
really hard and I appreciate everything
that you guys do. So, thank you. Hey,
Mark, can I just counterpoint that
because I think it's important. Marcy,
we always Thank you for bringing that up
again. I want to hear everyone's
opinion. Um, I'm of the vein that I I
would never want to slander a person in
order to make my point. And I'm not here
to judge whoever put the flyer out. I
have no idea who did, who didn't,
whatever. I mean, I feel like tonight we
will be discussing, at least I came
ready. Everybody that knows me knows I
come ready every single meeting to
discuss the budget, to come out with my
points, to say where I think we can cut,
to think what's fair. I don't think it's
our job to figure out who did this
flyer. I mean, I'm sure we all have our
opinions and think, you know, I mean,
there's there's a way to go about things
in a way not. I'm sure here though to
ready to talk about points in the budget
and how we can get better with having
the true facts. Um, but I'm I'm with
Mark on the the one fact I want to hear
from everybody. So, thank you for your
input, but I'm not here to decide what
to do about that flyer that wound up in
the, you know, River East. And if it got
everyone's attention, it did. There's
ways you can do that. You publicly speak
at meetings. You make sure whether
you're voted down all the time, you make
sure you stand up as the only person,
even if you're on the board of finance
and talk about things. So, that's all I
I don't know if we're going to go into
the flyer, per se, is my I would say no.
I I would think most of the people,
right? I don't think that's our job to
go into the flyer. I'm ready to talk
about the budget for sure. Yeah. You
know, and find out what's where could
be. Thank you. But that needed to be
addressed, Mark, because it it did
opened up. Thank you. Can I just say one
more quick thing? Make it quick, please.
Just um I I know that every people are
probably afraid because I I sense fear
on people on the boards and also people
in town. And I know myself whenever I
say something I feel like I get I get um
backlash. So anyway, that could be why
that the person whoever or people
didn't, you know, claim who they were.
That's all. Okay. All right. I have Ela
Burchchart or Buchar.
Yeah. Hi. Uh yeah, not to harp on it,
but I was going to say I I believe that
the vote failed. Um it was a resounding
no because of that flyer just as Bill
mentioned. Um
um you know these facts and figures were
just thrown out there and the issue the
the big issue is is that people don't
know if it's right or wrong. and and
unfortunately people don't take the time
to follow all the budgets and go to the
board of ed meetings and understand what
that that's all about and they don't
take the time to ask questions of stuff
that they don't understand.
But when somebody goes ahead and and a
yellow flyer goes ahead and puts out to
people who really don't have any
information at all to base their opinion
except for, you know, the taxes are
going up a little bit um to all of a
sudden have that put in their face, then
it's just going to make them mad and
they're going to say, "Well, hell no.
That doesn't look right. That's bad."
But if that's the first time that
they're seeing any information about
this, whether it be correct or incorrect
without any background or or ability to
ask questions 4 days before the
referendum, that's that's not good. So I
I do know what what appears here is
people need to in our town meetings
really get down to the tedious
explanation of things because that's
what people all of a sudden need to
know. That's it. Thanks. Okay. Thank
you. Ela uh Scotty, I'll go to you. It
look like you popped in a little there.
So hi.
Um, I I think I want to say that I'm
hoping the board doesn't make drastic
changes to the budget based on what, as
everyone is pointing out, is probably a
lot of false information. The vote was
probably, we don't know for sure, but
probably affected by a serious amount of
misinformation. So, I'm hoping the board
takes a very measured response and
doesn't do drastic cuts because the
first vote failed. I think u first vote
failed because of this flyer that came
out with no time for response or
corrections.
That's it. Okay. All right. Thank you,
Scott. Um running
through uh looks like Leanne Hutcherson,
you're the next on the screen.
I am all set. Thanks. Okay. Thank you,
Leanne. Linda, Derek,
Linda, have any comment? You're muted.
So, I'll swing back and see if we get
you back. Okay. Now, I have four phone
numbers. I'm going to read out the last
four numbers.
uh if it's you try to unmute yourself
and uh you can add any comment that you
have. The first one I have is the number
ending in well I guess I'll read the
seven digits. It's uh
9896988. Okay, you're still on mute. So
I'm going to move on to the next number.
7425475. It looks like you're unmuted,
so you can speak if you have any
comment.
Um, this is Leanne Hutchinson. Um, no.
Um, I still don't, but thank you for
reading off the number.
Okay. Thanks. Uh, next number on the
board is 6804212.
Hi, Mark. And the board of finance, this
is Shannon Len. Yes, I just have a
couple quick things to say. Good
evening. Um, I don't envy your position.
Um, I echo what Scott Soyette said. I
hope you do take a measured approach.
I've lived in this town for more than 20
years and I absolutely acknowledge that
we needed to invest in the
infrastructure in this town because it
had been woefully um underfunded for
many, many years. So, I appreciate that
the town voted to give the town an
increase of 16% last year.
We now need to invest in our school
because we've had a significant increase
in our student population.
Um, we are not overbudgeted. As Valerie
pointed out, things happen during the
school year that enable us to save
money. I don't think we should be
punished for having a surplus. We have
three very large capital projects for
which we don't have the money and we
have capital projects for which we don't
have a fund until it was finally funded
um with our surplus and with money from
the town that the board of finance
generously created a fund for us which
has been really um
necessary. Um the final thing I want to
say it was kind of already said by
Elaine. I am so frustrated and I've said
this for the past 10 years that people
at the very last minute who have never
participated in the budget process come
into the budget process with
misinformation and then also accuse
people who have created the budget of
not being transparent, of not being
honest. Um, it's just so frustrating. We
held two, we offered two townwide
meetings for people to be informed about
the board of education budget this year.
One was not attended by any anyone
whatsoever. The board of education sat
in the gym by ourselves. Excuse me.
Melissa Latesca came, one of our
teachers. Um, and the other was a
workshop that wasn't intended by anybody
online either. um that is is just not
what should be happening in a democracy
if people want to then criticize or vote
down a budget. And the final thing I'll
say is I thought it was indicative at
the town meeting on the budget that only
three people out of the more than
hundred were there voted against the
budget or would have voted against it to
move it forward a referendum. And then
with the results yesterday, I just find
that um very skewed and don't really
understand what happened. So again, as I
started off with, I think that um port
tends to suggest to the board of finance
a very measured approach in reducing the
budgets both for the town and for the
board of education. Good luck tonight.
Thanks very much.
Mark, were you talking because you're
muted?
Thank you. Sorry, John. Uh, yeah. The
next number I have is
977-58000. If you want to unmute
yourself, we you make any public
comment.
Hi. Uh, Sarin St. Rock and, um, I was
lucky to follow Shannon and she, uh,
clearly stated everything I was feeling.
So, um, thank you. I was fortunate to
follow her. Uh, so nothing further to
comment at this time. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you.
Someone's hands up. Yep. See that? I
think it's somebody who didn't get to
comment.
Um, so we have
9896988. You have to unmute yourself. We
can't unmute you.
We're not hearing anything. I'm going to
go back to Linda. Derek, Linda, I don't
know if you had the opportunity to uh if
you have any comment or you can unmute
yourself.
We'll need them. Okay.
one.
Okay. Well, I think unfortunately um
we're going to have to call the end to
the public comment. Uh hopefully folks
didn't want to uh comment that we're
muted and couldn't unmute yourself, but
we do need to move on. Um so, we'll go
ahead and uh open the uh budget
discussion. So, all of you the public,
you're welcome to stay. Uh please put
yourself on mute just so we avoid any
background uh noise. Oh, sorry. So,
Um um we now move on to the budget
workshop. Um yeah, Bill say um I know
it's not Sarah Becker, but if if you're
not speaking, if you could turn the
video off, it slows down the overall and
I get a lot of pixelation. Thank you,
Mr. Becker. If you're not talking, if
you're not on the board, it'd be great
if you just turn your your video off. It
helps the overall speed. Okay. Thank
you. All right.
All right. Thank you. So for the board
of finance um I would suggest um we
proceed we obviously have a bifurcated
budget. So we have the town budget and
we have the school budget. The school
budget is a single line item. We're not
going to address any particular we
obviously cannot change any line items
within the school budget. Uh but it's a
single line item and obviously I think
it's the the most contentious part of
this overall budget. So, I would propose
that we uh tackle the town budget first.
Um, we have some corrections to make
there. Um, I'm thinking this will
probably be a little more
straightforward. Um, but I'm willing to
entertain other suggestions from the
board. Mark, we really should just be
able to freely speak. I feel like you
sometimes direct us and this is a really
important meeting and I so appreciate
everything you do but I'm feeling very
directed and then I get anxious that I'm
not going to be able just speaking from
the heart you know um yes so thank you
for addressing I don't want to jump on
your thought you know I think we all
should have a moment we're all on you
know you know going around whenever you
say but thank you that was the main
thing I know that I spoke at the town
meeting and brought up a series of
corrections and mistakes that I found.
So before we do anything,
um, you know, not trying to take away
from everybody else, I'm hoping we can
do that. Um, so my one motion would be
if I, you know, in order to keep things
flowing along, you know, don't know how
everyone else feels, but I feel
confident everybody's been copied on the
emails. it was found that there was a
really big error in the health insurance
um estimations. We've all been copied on
the emails. So, I feel confident
especially since there's less employees
that will be covered now and I'm not
even take for now and I'm not even
taking that into consideration, but I'd
like to make a motion to reduce the um
health insurance benefit line. I'm sorry
that I don't have it in front of me. Can
you look at the detail? Joanne, do you
want me to share the Thank you. Yeah.
Hopefully my eyesight I might have to
shut off and look real close. But the
one thing that
There you go, Rob. That's what I'm going
to be doing. That's what I look like an
idiot when I do it, but yeah. Well, I'll
shut off and I'll have my little
magnifying glass in front of me and I
can read it off. I also have a copy,
but I know which motion I'd like to make
for that because um we've all been told
it was overfunded. Yeah, it's a very
specific amount. I made the corrections
in the spreadsheet earlier so we can
take a look at it and we can make a very
specific uh change. Oh, I was going to
motion it just like 1,000 more than but
if you have the specific I'll look at
that like I was saying while we're
getting it um you know unfortunately or
or I don't even Okay, so this is the
healthcare and Murf tab. Okay,
so hopefully you're seeing that. Um so
I'll zoom in a little bit. So the the
the issue this is the corrected version
by the way. So the issue just for
background is that these numbers here
about the uh health insurance cost for
singles families and and and two people
uh were incorrect originally in the
spreadsheet that we were working with
earlier and the dental cost was also
incorrect. There was a lot of
incorrections Mark. There was a lot
wrong. I could have dug and dug and dug
but just for the public to know. Thank
you. Okay. Well, these are the amounts
that I believe as I if I understand the
issue, these are the amounts that were
stated and they should have been
populating the table up here. Correct.
Okay. When you look at the original
calculation, it was at 239,954.
Roughly, it was uh this corrected
calculation is an amount of 210,577.
Uh so there's a difference of
29,376. So that is about that lines up
more or less with what the treasurer had
said if if we had made the corrections
that that would have been the
correction. So if we go over to the main
budget um
Mark thank you for doing all of that. If
everybody just remembers for the sake of
saying it, that night I made a motion. I
had come up with a fast math figure of
29,000 about incorrect, which is almost
spot on. Yeah. Um and then I made a
motion of
25,000, but I don't know. I'll let you
continue. Yeah. Yeah. I would say we
know what we know what the number should
be. It should be this
210,577. So, we could just go ahead and
use that. Okay. Did is the number that's
included in there the former I don't
mean and I don't want to talk about
anything negative but
um the other number might have included
the health care cost for the um former
senior center director.
I mean we can keep and we can keep a
number in there. I'm not going to go
that have to replace that position Joan.
So I don't think we want to go that
deep. probably not going to change. My
only motion was going to be 30,000. I'm
fine with making an exact motion. Sorry.
Thanks. Of course.
Right.
So, do you want to go back to that other
page, Mark, while I see the amount?
Yeah. Yeah. So, I think what you want to
do is is make a motion to change the
specific line item to a specific dollar
amount.
Absolutely. Oh, understood. I just
needed the 2937. Oh, you mean you want
the total? You just want the total.
Yeah, we don't want to talk about
differences here. I think I think pro
probably what you want to do is make a
motion that you know this this line item
1412152100 the health and dental
insurance be set at this level 210,744.
Okay. I would like to make a motion that
we set the health and dental insurance
line the 141 215 52
to is that 2105774
4 cents. Y I mean I can see it. I just
didn't know. Yeah, that's the right one.
Yep. I second. Okay, Rob seconds. We
have any discussion?
Uh, good work Joanne on finding that.
That's Yeah, absolutely. I mean before
the meeting, right? It was it was
totally frenetic, but it is it is
impressive. You were you were, you know,
within 500 bucks of what the answer was.
I just wish we had had it was just
really unfortunate timing and everyone
was like, what is going on? And it was
just I know that I'm glad in a sense the
blessing in disguise here. We can fix
it. Yeah, that's all I feel back to
referendum.
The one thing I wanted to say which was
it doesn't matter now. We're going to
get to this end result. But there had
there had been a correction because we
knew it went from the 8% to the
7%. So this was really looked at.
Remember there was emails when we knew
it went from 8% to 7. But listen, we're
fixing it now. We're fixing it. Let's
just move on. We don't have to go
backwards and well I came ready. I'm I
don't take it lightly. No, but you're
right. Further discussion.
Yeah, I'll call for a vote. All those in
favor say I. I. I. Any
opposed? Any
abstensions? Okay. Hearing none, the
motion passes. The line item is now set
where that
was. Okay. Hey, do we have any other
action on the town budget? Mark, I don't
know. This is on a I do. Oh, go ahead.
Hold on.
Um, can I talk now, Mark? Oh, yeah. Go
ahead, Kim. Okay. Thank you. Um, I'd
like for us to talk about Christine
Hercules, um, salary, the $5,000 cut
that we
made. Is that an option to discuss
tonight? Possibly. Every line item is an
option here. Okay. This is just a bundle
of line item. So, I I've had some time
to think about that and I have some
concerns about that cut. I think that,
you know, keeping really good staff in
place is important. It's expensive to go
out and search for a new person, get
them on board, train them. So, I would
appreciate the board of finance um
looking into that and possibly restoring
that $5,000. I'm not sure the process.
You all should just make a a motion,
Kimberly. Okay. I'd like to make a
motion that we restore the $5,000 back
to Christine Harkles. I second it. That
was going to be one of my motions. We
talked about it in executive session if
you remember. Okay. So, so what I would
say is what we need to do is identify
the line item in the in the budget and
set the amount that we want. Okay. It's
so tiny for me even with glasses on. So
I
um I'm not sure but so the treasurer
salary um correct assistant right it's
right there Mark assistant
109 it was the stipend amount yes
so you want to make a motion to to put
$5,000 $5,000 back yes okay so so that
if I'll read that back to you and let me
know if this is okay. So this is uh this
is line item
10910151000 the assistant treasurer
stipend. So you're proposing to increase
that to $5,000
correctly what I'm proposing I think.
Okay. Do we have a second? Rob seconded
it I think. Or no I'm sorry. Jo seconded
it. Second. I didn't but I Yeah I did
second it. Okay. Thank you. All right.
So we have a second. Do we have further
discussion? I would like to since since
it was made a motion, I thought this was
something that was discussed in
executive session. Um, with all of the
thoughts coming out about, you know, the
way we we had
mot took it off the first time was the
way it was listed on the spreadsheet was
inaccurate because this person was a
union person. So, I'm all for putting it
back in as long as we don't have that
same language on the spreadsheet, which
goes against union principles. And
clearly, there was going to be anou
written because this person does do
additional work, is learning to be a
treasurer and all of those things. So, I
support Kim in this. It just needed to
be done the correct way. And and I'd
like to also add though to that that I
think that we've had really good
conversations with the select men about
the decisions that they make and I think
moving forward I'd like to keep that
conversation going with them. It's
important that we talk with them about
things and how they make decisions and
why things are the way they are. I I
would it's really important to me to
continue those conversations with them.
Okay. Any other comments?
Okay, let's go ahead and take a vote.
All those in favor say I. I. I. I. Any
opposed? Any abstensions?
Okay, the motion passes. I'll go ahead
and add that right in here. Direct ad.
That's not a formula. So, 5,000.
So, okay. Thank you. Uh further motions
on the line items in the budget.
Mark, I wanted to bring up um adding
revenue back in. I know that there was a
decrease with the ECS funding um of that
$89,000 that was taken away. Um I
haven't seen the revised spreadsheet
that you have tonight. Was it just
updated and put back in?
This the only change here is that I um I
updated the healthcare and dental. Okay,
great. So I didn't literally 15 20
minutes before the meeting. No, perfect.
No, I just want to make sure that I
didn't miss something. No, there wasn't
anything distributed. So I didn't want
to, you know, so I know that we had
reduced this will help the overall
budget as well if we now know that that
I thought it was 89,000, right? It was
89,000. Yep. We can put that back in if
we're receiving it and that Eric, can
you confirm that? Yeah, just I think it
makes sense to have Eric. Yeah, of
course. Sure. So, um, can I absolutely
Sorry, my
mic is hiding. I can't absolutely
guarantee it's going back in the budget.
We only want guarantees, Eric. Right. I
it seems probable because the uh
legislature overall seems to support it.
Um the governor is kind of opposed to
it, but you know
um more than likely it will be restored,
but no guarantees. So if I were a
betting man, I would bet that it get
restored. Yeah, it does sound like it's
going to go back, but it could be June
before we know.
So, you're you're proposing that we
would go to the
um basically back to the budgeted amount
of 2000 or sorry, 2 million. I I had
thought that Eric spoke to this at our
last board of finance meeting and that
it was coming back to us. Um that was my
either that or the budget meeting. Yeah.
Yeah. One of one of our many meetings.
So, are you going to make a motion to
add that back in, Joanne? The 89,000. I
would like to make a motion to add the
89,000 back into the ECS. Sorry, I need
to get close.
89,040 ECS funds. I'll second that.
Okay. Okay. So, just to clarify then,
was that you, Rob, that seconded? No,
that was Bill. I think it was me, Bill.
Okay, Bill. Sorry. Um, just to clarify,
what that would do is take us back to
the previous year budget funding of
2,4,782.
Correct.
Okay, we have further
discussion. All right, I guess I'll call
for a vote. All those in favor say I. I.
I. Anyone
opposed? Is anyone abstaining?
Okay, thank you. We'll go ahead and make
that change.
Mark, could you just scroll down to the
next revenue section when you're done
with that, too?
Yeah.
Thank you. Okay. Does that help? Yeah. I
just wanted to look at it.
You'll excuse me. I'm going to save my
work here.
Good job.
Um, one other thing that I think we had
a change last minute u after we'd
already published the the proposed
budget is um I think Eric you got the
final number for the um state trooper.
Uh that was in the last budget. It was
okay. Yep.
I mean, that's not a really a final
number. No, that's just a year ahead
best guess from the state police. Okay,
got it. Okay, so it doesn't bear
changing here then. Short short story.
Mark. Yeah. I mean, if we're at a point,
I don't know if anyone else is going to
bring I don't want to monopolize it. If
Oh, go ahead. Nobody's got anything
pending. So, I mean, I feel like we do
have to overall listen
to I truthfully don't think I feel like
the budget might not have passed
regardless of the flyer. I think we've
heard a lot of So, I'm just going to say
that really quick. So, just from
comments I know there was letters
written to the river besides that, you
know, people that brought a lot of good
points up. So, I feel that I would like
to try to make a couple more changes and
listen to the town's people that did
vote. So, that's where I'm coming from.
So, I would like to on the town side
budget, Dylan, just to clarify, that's
what we're on right now. Can we talk a
little bit more about the town side of
the budget, please? Oh, yeah. No, no,
sorry. I'm still on the town side. Okay.
Just making sure that's what we're
doing. Okay. But you're talking about
the board of education budget. Okay. No,
I'm so sorry. I just mean that a lot of
the public and who are here tonight
commented that they think the the budget
in general, you know, didn't pass. You
know, there was a yes or a no because
and I truly feel like there was a lot of
people that weren't going to pass this
budget regardless. So, I want to state
that for the record. Um, and everybody's
allowed their opinions. I'm still going
to like y'all tomorrow. It doesn't
matter. You know, that's the way I
operate. Um, but I think so I'd like to
try to take into factor what the town
has spoken. So I would like to and what
we did learn in this process was that
because the town attorney came on one of
our meetings
um and and and came in and and let us
have it. But one of the things that he
did say and that I learned was that we
are allowed even on the town side Mark
to make just a we don't have to go
specific line item like if I want to
look at a department so that they can
choose where they want a reduction. So
that's where I'm coming from. He said we
are allowed to do an overall reduction.
Um so I'm going to go forward again
listening to the town's people and um
make a motion. If you could go down to
public works, please. I'm going to look
closer. Okay. So, the way I'm reading it
in the proposed budget, the public
works is 45711341.
Yes. Yep. So, I'm going to just propose
an
overall reduction of
$25,000 to the public works department
and let them decide where they would
like that reduction.
Okay. Does anybody want to second that
motion?
You have a
second a question or do you want to
wait? I'm looking for a second, Rob.
Yeah, I understood.
Well, I guess we can continue discussion
if we don't have a second on that
motion. Yeah. So, I can I have a Wait a
minute. There was no mot There was no
second to that motion. So, there's no
There's no second to the motion. No
action. We're back in a general
discussion of the budget. Yeah. So,
yeah. Can I make a can I make a point?
Hold on. I think Liz was asking or or or
Robert, did you have something specific
or was it about that motion? It was just
I I couldn't remember and I was just
going to ask for clarification if
anybody remembers whether we had reduced
the public works budget at all. I know
we made the cut to the road funding that
I hated doing. Yeah, we kept the road
improvement fund be. Yeah, I don't think
we made any changes to No, I proposed
several changes as small as 2,500, but
um you know, they didn't. So, this this
is the requested budget, you know,
without us having cut. That's that's all
I was just for my own memory. Correct.
Yeah, they didn't make any that was it.
All right. So, I'm going to go in order
of think of people who wanted to talk.
Go ahead, Kimberly.
Um, I'd like to talk about the road
budget and possibly increasing it.
So, you're talking about the uh the fund
for the uh road improvement. Road
improvement. Yes. Yeah. It's right here.
So, uh the original request or or last
year, I'm sorry, was at 410,000. Um
overall, we took 50,000 out. Correct.
Yep.
So, I'd like to make a motion that we
restore the $50,000 to the road budget.
Okay. Do we have a second for that?
One second.
Okay. Liz, was that you, Liz? Yes, that
was Liz. Okay. Thanks. Okay. Discussion.
Um, may I marker? Can I go ahead? Go
ahead, though. So,
um I'm I'm with what you guys are doing
there. I understand because roads are
something I'm passionate about. I lived
on a terrible road for a long time. Um
and I would support something maybe
midway between the 50 that we took off.
Um because listen, if we've made some
nice gains here with with what Joanne
found and um but we're starting to add a
lot of stuff back in and I just don't
want this to fail on the next time as
people, you know, discussed. It'd be
nice if we get this budget to pass in
the next time through and if we start
adding a lot of money back in. So, as
much as I would love to say put 50,000
back in because I would really love to,
I I would like to see us do something um
maybe a little a little bit less, a
restore maybe 25,000, but I know that's
a separate motion, but I just wanted to
make my thought clear on that. I think
that that's fair, Bill. I appreciate the
conversation. You know, we need to talk
about it. Okay.
May I make
I'm sorry. I just saw Joan's name. Go
ahead, Louise. I've spoken already. You
go next. Go ahead, Louise. Okay. Thank
you, Joanne. Um, yeah, I just want to
let everybody know regarding the um
results of the the election,
um, the majorities did state that the
budget was right on um
360 and then two high was 229.
So, I think that the town does feel that
the town budget is kind of where it
should
be. So, I kind of agree with what Bill's
saying. If we're going to do something,
we do it halfway. Okay. Yeah. I was
going to say uh the same thing about the
town budget that uh actually
64% of the people said the town budget
is too low or just right. So, if you
like add those numbers together, that's
64%. So that's interesting. I think um
yeah, you know, somewhere in the middle
there might be the way to go.
I could support either way. I think it's
a good conversation. So Mark, if I may,
now that everybody's speaking, it was
hard for us to make some of these cuts
at the beginning of the budget season.
Like Bill said, and I want the public
out there to know that even though we're
seeing this amount, these are funds. So
there's already a big like picture of
bank account. So this isn't the end all
of this. This is adding to the big bank
account which will be over a million
dollars. So I appreciate Bill because I
know how much he is in favor of of road
so it's really hard for him to to do
that. So I think um the logic is there.
You know we're we're on this board to do
a job and every year we kind of have to
split it around. So this was the year
that we did decide to take I think my
first proposal was a h 100,000 which
didn't go for it you know and trying to
lower a budget for like the people that
are on a fixed income and you know you
look at the bottom line and it's it's
only a smaller increase but that's
because of the math that's going into it
and the things that are be putting
against it. Whatever we decide on is
what the town is marrying themsself to
every year. So again, I think it's hard
to put back in after you've taken out
and it was hard for us to make these
choices. So of course, I mean, everyone
knows I'm not going to be in favor
because I looked at the big picture.
There's a huge fund that they're going
to be using. They actually have two
funds that they can do road work with
and it gets spent every year though. I
think it gets right. But Jay starts it
in the like this time of year when it
gets warm, you know, which is great. and
they do all of, you know, I I'm not the
expert on this, but they do all the road
work they can, then they, you know, get
their funding in July. They keep going
and he has a good system going. So,
that's all I don't want to bore people
with my my voice. There was a reason we
only took away 50,000. We're not leaving
them with the total that's there.
There's already an amount in the big
bank account that they can use. So,
that's my So, can we meet in the middle?
Um I I just want to add one more thing
to that and I and you know Joanne you
and I are on the same page I think here
but it you know when when when Scott
talked about what it costs to pave you
know like one one mile of road you know
that money that we have in the pot
wouldn't even pave one mile of road. So
there's 23 I think miles of road in
town. So again, it was a painful cut and
I kind of again would support something
giving some back but um not keeping it
where it was because I know there's a
these roads went to total disrepair for
a long time and I don't want them to go
back to that. I want to make sure
there's enough money every year to make
sure the the roads are maintained at the
level they are now. And I and I believe
all the roads in town that are main
right now at a good level at a good spot
and I hate to see them get, you know,
slide backwards again like they did for
many, many years. So again, I'm kind of
in the middle of maybe restoring 25,000
or something like that. So that's all
I'll say. Rob, I think you did you have
something to add? Yeah, just just I'll
try to be really brief. Uh, you all know
I hated this cut when I proposed it. Uh,
I, you know, if I had my brothers, I'd
restore the full 50, but we just had a
budget fail. So, I'm a little wary, a
little leery of we've put some things
back in. Yes, we've got some good stuff
on the revenue side and we and we found
the 30,000 in savings thanks to Joanne
on the healthcare spending. Um, so if we
do anything, I would also agree with,
you know, kind of a 25,000 partial
restore, not the full amount. And I
think there's a case to to leave it grit
our teeth for one year. Um, and, you
know, I I'm very much with you, Bill,
philosophically on the roads. I I
completely agree with you. I I think
they could survive a one-year uh 50k
hit, but that's just a gut feel. So, I
I'm with you guys. I I what I'll go with
what the board wants to do. Uh but I
don't I don't think it's a great look if
we just go through this budget and what
we're doing is adding things. Yeah.
After we had a budget fail. So, you
know, that's where Okay. All right.
Anybody else? And I just wanted to say
say don't forget there was a surplus on
the town side last year. We have a
contingency fund. if they are doing so
great and getting things done with the
roads and such and they're running out
of money. I mean, there is ways to get a
little bit more. That's why I support I
thought the 50,000 was very um you know,
conservative is the word I'm looking
for. So, that's it.
I think everybody's spoken. Can we
anybody can we call for a vote or
anybody have anything else to add?
Okay, just to remind you, we're voting
on restoring that $50,000 so that the
line item for road improvement would be
back to
$410,000 as uh for the funding of the
road improvement fund. All those in
favor say I
am. Is that Louise? I'm sorry. Kim,
Kim, I believe.
Okay. Sorry. That's okay. Well, I'll I'm
on I I'll say I Okay, Kim and Liz. All
those opposed
I sorry. Yeah. So, that looks like Rob,
you're muted.
I'm muted. Yeah, I was in. No, I hear
Liz. I hear you, Liz. I hear Liz. Yeah.
No, thank you. No,
Louise. No, I said sorry. No, she's not.
Okay. Okay. So, Louise, were you a yes
or a no? No.
Okay, Rob, you are a no. Correct. Bill,
you are a no. No. Yes. Correct. Okay.
So, and and I'm a no. So, so that's And
who who am I missing? Did I? Joanne,
you're a no. I'm a no. Okay. So, the
motion fails. Five to two. I'd make I'd
like to make a motion that we restore
$25,000 to the road fund.
Okay, we have a second. Louise seconds.
Thank you. Um, further
discussion. I think we kind of all
spoke. I mean, I I'll say up front, I'm
going to vote no just because I feel
like we need to pass a budget and I'm
not comfortable adding money into what
we had as a failed budget. And I am a
huge fan of funding the roads better
than we are. But, uh, we already had
down people speak and I'm I'm not in
favor of adding a lot of money back in,
but I appreciate the sentiment. I
personally would like to see it
in.
So, anyone
else? Okay, we'll call for a vote. All
those in favor say I. I.
I. It looks like Bill, Rob, Louise, Kim,
Liz, how about you? Yep. I Okay. And are
those opposed?
I motion passes. I'm consistent. I'm No,
no, no. I just I just I'm cracking up
with the I versus nay thing. It has
nothing to do with my word.
It's just that the I and Nay thing is
drive it was driving me crazy.
Sorry. Nay. Nay. I don't know. Yeah.
Yeah. The correct response is is nay or
on the Yeah. I just think it's important
that we see the progress move forward.
So yeah, I agree, Kim. Thank you. I
don't disagree. All right. Thank you. I
think it's a good thing. I hope we get
this passed. So,
okay. Thank you. Made that change. Any
other adjustments to the town budget?
Um, Mark, I'm I I'm not sure about this
what I'm about to say, but if there was
a town surplus of, and I'm not sure if
it's been verified so much, but
somewhere around $300,000, I think we
did we use 190,000 of that surplus in
this
budget. Is that what we did? No, the
surplus typically we we need
to it typically rolls into the uh
general the general fund.
Okay. The fund balance. Did we Eric? Am
I correct there?
I thought Okay. Eric, could you clarify
that
we use some fund balance against it? I
think Eric will speak. Yeah, sure. Sorry
about that. I didn't realize I was on
mute. So, uh, essentially the way it
works is any monies that are
unspent automatically roll into the fund
balance. What you do every year is you
make a decision on the mill rate
calculation page. Uh, how much of that
fund balance you are going to, if any,
are you going to allocate to offset
taxation the next year? That's why I
sent around the thing about um you know
you as a board ultimately coming up with
some kind of policy on how much of a
fund balance you want to keep and what
things do you want to consider as part
of the actual uh fund balance which
essentially stays as the emergency
reserve for the town. Uh I see. So we
did choose to use 19. we choose to use
$190,000.
Yeah, correct. In there. And I'm just
wondering in in trying to get this
budget passed, can we increase that at
all or is that is, you know, dangerous?
Does it not confirm the amount that was
actually in surplus or
uh I we're far enough along in the audit
process
um to know that there was roughly a
$200,000 or $400,000 surplus on the town
side. that was around
260,000 in surplus revenue and the rest
was uh under expenditure on the town
side. So 140ish or under expenditure two
I'm sorry off the top of my head it's
somewhere in that category. I can
probably try to look it up real quick.
Okay. No ballpark is for me. But that
gives you
So could we increase that that line I
guess to help
with a mill
rate and so the unexpended fund balance
I if memory serves from when from way
back when um the whole idea is that the
state sort of guidance target is 10%
right of your operating budget peranom
so if you have a $10 million budget you
want a million dollars in reserve
I think I think it went up though didn't
it Eric actually the
GFA says you should maintain two full
months of operating funds.
Um, which for us which equates to
basically around
17%. Um, but they also say that as a
town you can consider you should
basically the the reason why they think
towns should have individual policies on
this is some towns have more exposure.
Let's say you were your town was on St.
Andreas fall you would probably want to
consider give have considerably more
money than that in the bank and the same
thing if you were a coastal town. So it
takes into account the risk, but on
average they're suggesting that 17%
number, but in our case, we can take
into account some of the money that we
have in the permanent funds because
let's be honest, if you're covered,
right? Yeah. rock solid emergency, you
as a board have the ability to pull
money from any permanent fund the town
has um and allocated towards emergency
research. So, I think we can operate
instead of at 17% unexpended fund
balance at a number lower than that. But
I don't think I'm the guy that tells
you. I think you guys as a board have to
decide what number you want um going
forward. Do you know the balance, Eric?
Yeah, just I knew you were gonna ask me
that.
Um, I think the balance is around 1.6
million right now.
I don't know how my calculator 1.6
million, right? So, you know, if you
think about a basically a $13 million
budget and multiply that by 17%.
Um, we're definitely under that
threshold. Um, but I think we can
consider some of these other factors and
probably stay roughly where we are
overall. But I also think that's a board
decision, not a Eric decision. No, for
sure. And again, Eric, for sure, but
your your knowledge of explaining that
was helpful just now. So, right. So, the
17% it's like 2.2 million if you if you
base it off Yes. $13 million budget.
Yes. So, I'm actually I'm happy to hear
that they changed that because I always
thought the 10% was too low. So, that
Yeah. But in theory, they were almost
threatening to penalize you if you get
too much beyond that. Right. Well, that
was the whole discussion number of years
ago, and that's what I was remembering.
you know, targeting your back one town
way out there
and then get get shorted on your ECS
funding or something. Should we wait
until we're finished with everything and
see where we stand and then decide
because I remember bringing up this fund
balance question. Yeah. You know, at the
end of our process because I kind of
wanted to lower it for the taxpayers,
too, but I was voted down at the time.
So, I think it's great that Bill brought
it up again. Um well before we go on to
the education portion Joan I was just
hoping that we could
you know no I hear you but is this
something but that that will affect the
amount if we if we make a change to the
education line it'll it will it probably
is going to make a huge difference.
That's all I meant is right where do we
stand when we're done with all of our
changes and then see if we want to help
the taxpayers even more and add more in.
It's just my thought, but I'm whatever
the board wants to do. Yeah. So, just
just what I'm typing here, just a little
working sheet. So, the 1.6 million is
what Eric estimates the current balance
is. If we were to fund it at 17%, we
would need to increase the fund balance
by about
$128,000, not a problem. If we got the
surplus we have, so that sounds like
that's even with the use of the fund
balance to offset taxes at the current
rate. If we were to split the difference
maybe between 17% and 12 and a half or I
did that I didn't do that right. Was
that 13 and a half%.
Mark, are you basing the 17 off of um
amount raised by taxation or total
expens? No, no, no. This is the this is
the estimate the proposed fund balance
based on a two-month the 17% that the
state Okay. This is if we were going to
follow that two months worth of
expenditures in the fund balance. This
is what the fund balance should be
roughly. See, we cut that back to This
is why I'm asking is because I came up
with 2.2 million. So, I'm trying to
figure out where I went wrong. I don't
know. This is This is the bottom. Oh,
I'm sorry. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. I'm talking about total
expenditure. That's 13 million, not 10.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Hey, Eric. Yes.
Um I just heard that somebody is in the
waiting room trying to get into the
meeting. Is it too late to let somebody
in or No. Uh nope. Let me do that real
quick. Sorry, I was not paying attention
to the waiting room. That's okay.
Thanks. Sorry to interrupt.
Let them in right now. Thanks. Not Nope.
You're multitasking.
Yeah, good catch,
Rob. Yeah. So, the 17 that would make
more sense. 2.2 million. And even even
if we split the difference from 10%,
it's 1.6. 7. So it's a little higher
than we are now. Right. So again, just
like Eric said, that's something to
consider. What do we as a town want to
have in reserve?
Right now that now that it seems like,
you know, back then, you know, this
discussion would have been different
five years ago, right? When or whatever
it was when we were told basically if
you have more than 10% you put a target
on your back, they're going to cut your
funding. You know, that kind of thing.
If that's changed, then yeah, we we
absolutely should think about whether do
we want 13, 14, 15, something in the
air. What this is telling me, this
little sort of quick calculations we're
doing, what this suggests to me is that
whatever changes we might make on on
using fund balance should be small. That
would be my take, right?
So currently, if I'm just looking at
this on the fly, so so
uh general
So, we're looking at
1.87, but then we're subtracting 100
uh 190,000 from that by what we're
putting into the budget for this
year. So,
uh yeah, that's 1.6 something. So,
somewhere in there. So, we're really
We're we're 13% roughly. Roughly. Yeah.
With the current one. Okay. But we also
have a fair bit of
money in, you know, the the
regular non- major, you know, all the
other capital reserve funds. So on any
given day, you know, at some times of
the year, we've drawn the public works
the the road work fund way down. Um, but
we might have money in a bridge and
covert fund which we could tap in an
emergency. It would screw up future
planning, but we could do that. So, we
certainly don't need the
2.2. It's got to be, you know, you guys
have to at some point have a discussion
of of and set a policy on what you want
to maintain and then you can figure out
how much to put back in each year. So, I
guess I we go back to what you said
earlier, Joanne. We got to see what
happens on the education side. Then we
look at the whole number and then we can
make a decision in what percentage we
want to keep there. Makes sense. I like
that idea too, Bill. Yeah, I I didn't
quite understand what you're saying at
first, but now I do. Thank you. Okay.
Um, can I just quick just quickly before
we move on? So, so far the net of the
changes we've made between adding back
in
ES education cost share money between
fixing 29,000 almost $30,000 fix. So,
that's about 120 in the positive and
then we tapped back on 30,000 in
expenditure. Correct. The 25 and the and
the 5,000. Right. Right. Correct. Am I
missing anything? That is that I think
that's all we've done. Right now we're
netting out to a 90,000ish savings back.
Correct. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Just for so
everybody's kind of got that in their
head as we go. Yep. Right. Because we
added how much did we add back in
tonight, Rob? Sorry. Thank you. We added
in 120. Say, right. Just shy of 120
because the 29,000 295 that you
identified as an error in the health,
right? Care spending and then 89,000 and
change in ECS money.
So, it's probably like 119,
but then we we put 25 from the road fund
back in and restored 5,000 of the
assistant uh finance.
Perfect. And Mark, while we're talking
about that, we did we did um clear that
explanation for the stipen, right? Under
the assistant finance director, there's
no language in the spreadsheet.
while we're finishing up this. Yeah, let
me take a look. Yeah, we should clear
that out. That was the whole reason it's
against
union. The anticipation is that there'll
be anou signed and blah blah blah. But
so where I mean I guess if you go all
you're just talking about the comment.
The comment. Thank you. Here this one.
Okay. Yeah. Well, that doesn't really
get published for the budget, but yeah,
we can take that out. Please do. That
was my whole reason for taking it out.
Yeah. Or for minusing it. Thank you.
Okay. Anything else relative to the town
budget we want to talk about or revenue?
So, I just want to give you more exact
numbers because I pulled up. So, last
year the revenue was
$226,000 700 more than
anticipated. The majority of which came
from two things. one, the state uh gave
us one of their surplus fund thingies
that they do occasionally when the state
has enough of a revenue surplus at the
end of the year. And the biggest
contributor was us getting the stiff
account which netted the town around
$140,000. Um, so and the rest was
honestly due to Kate uh or the tax
collector doing a much better job going
after uh tax scoff laws.
Um, you know, on the expenditure side,
we underexpended the budget including
contingency by
$180,000. So uh those were the two
numbers you have to work for.
I I think we had taken into account the
stiff revenue
when we set that. Um y
we did this year certainly. Yes.
So the current year, the prior year
taxes, we had a very successful year. We
actually budgeted more based on a last
12 month thing. So we did take that into
account also.
Correct. And and one thing I think we
have to realize that we can't
necessarily
expect an
amazing performance every year because
as you whittle away the back taxes,
there's just less and less that's likely
to be able to collected. Right.
So,
but you think that's realistic? What we
did? I was going to say, you think
that's a realistic number
then, Eric? You think there's still that
that amount of back taxes to be
collected? Yeah, I think there is. I
think that is
realistic. The only thing that's making
me a little nervous is that um because
we are going ahead with tax foreclosure
sales this year. Um there's a
possibility that we're going to be way
over on tax collection in the current
fiscal year. um cuz she's already got
you
know almost 150,000 in back
taxes more than kind of so we're already
running ahead on this current year that
somewhere along the line that is going
to run out. Sure. Um but I think we're
probably okay for next year because of
foreclosure sales. Derek, correct? Oh,
thanks. Yep. That's border selection
decision.
Um, yep. What do you mean? Can you
explain that? I guess I'm sure. So,
there's or is that what type of taxation
it is? There's three major things. Motor
vehicle, personal property, and then
real estate. personal property, it's
really hard to go back and collect taxes
that don't get paid because you don't
have a lot of teeth to go after them
other than uh sicking the state marshals
and try to confiscate their bank
accounts, which we do. Also, um real
estate pretty
much, you know, you have more teeth um
because you can lean the property. Um
when a property gets too far like too
far in debt or it's been too many years
then
um in in this case this year the the
town board of selectmen on the
recommendation from the tax collector
sent ones that were you know had been uh
unpaid for a number of years and a big
enough amount to make it worth it to tax
foreclosure. Um, so that process is
going on right now. Okay. Tax
foreclosure. Okay. I I didn't hear that
part. I was thinking home foreclosures,
but you're basically taking legal action
on the delayed payment of taxes.
Deliquid taxes. Yeah. Right.
Essentially, what happens is if you have
a property that goes into tax
foreclosure, there is an auction. um the
highest bidder um basically pays the
amount uh the worth of the property and
the tax the the amount of unpaid taxes
goes to the town and then the homeowner
then has some period of time to either
refinance or in some way pay that
individual back so they can prevent that
property from actually getting uh taken
from them, but they have to make a
positive action to do it. Gotcha. Okay.
Yep. Thank you. Yep.
And sorry to flip back and forth. I was
just validating some of the changes to
to net.
So, can we make a motion to um move on
to the education portion of the budget
or Yeah. I mean, and that doesn't mean
we can't come back to the town budget,
too. I mean, this there isn't a, you
know, we can't it's not like a struct
thing where the the agenda is going to
change. So, no. So, I've kept it kind of
open. It seems like it's kind of quieted
it down on this side. So, yeah.
Okay. So, you the RAM education line
obviously u is that's set by the
referendum. Yeah. uh so can't alter that
but here we have the um AES board of
education uh line so the proposed budget
number was given to us was
4,729,155 and 20
um so
$381,000 change roughly or an 8.8% 8%
increase. And obviously we've we've
heard a lot about the budget. We know
that that's the main point of contention
in the in the vote.
I'd like to make a motion.
Uh was that Liz? Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead,
Liz.
Um, I'd like to make to make a motion
to cut the increase. So, instead of
increasing
8.8% to cut it to 3 point 3% to 3%.
Can you can you repeat that?
I'd like to make a motion
to increase the board of edge bud board
of eds budget
3% instead of the original 8.8.
Okay, I'll second that. Liz, that was
Louise. Oh, I'm sorry. Kim. Kim.
Correct.
So, I'm just going to do a little cut
and paste here so that I can verify my
calculation. Whoops, that didn't work.
So, that would be Oh, I don't have that
that calculation. Yep. Okay. I was
actually going to consider So, so what
you would be doing is you're proposing
that the AES Board of Education line
item would be set at 4,478,000.
you know, round it up to 500 if you
want. 499.74.
Yep. So that is 3% over the current
year's budget. Correct. Yes. Yes. So if
we if you'll see if I if I copy this and
I paste it into the
spreadsheet, you see the percent change
is 3% here in column N. Yep.
Um, yeah. I
mean, we obviously understand the
surplus and I know there's lots of
reasons for it, but the surplus does
still it still lives in that in our
current budget. And I don't think this
decrease
would prevent them from
uh I don't think they would be
neglecting their contractual
liabilities.
Um, that's my motion.
Okay, we can talk about second. Yeah.
Further discussion.
This strikes me as the kind of drastic
cut I'd like to avoid. Um, I was
waiting. I I figured we'd take a whack
at that and lower the increase somewhat.
But from 8.8 to three is is a huge swing
and I'm not in favor. I think it's too
much, too deep, especially given that,
you know, the referendum results were
not that lopsided to to suggest that we
have to go to go that hard. So, you
know, I have a thought in mind for for
my own proposal, but I'll leave it there
for now. Uh I don't support this one. I
I would I go along with with Rob. Um I
know we do have to cut Liz here. Um that
was made pretty clear but I think that's
to be a little too drastic knowing that
there are some stamp mandate state
mandates where we have to hire new
teachers and pairs and you know software
and equipment for kids that are coming
in. It's growing every year. So I'm with
Rob. I know we have to do something
here. Let him finish talk. Oh, I'm
sorry. Go ahead. Go ahead. I'm I'm I'm
with Rob. I know we have to do
something. I just think that's a little
harsh. Um, and I don't I don't know. I
don't have a number off the top of my
head right now. So, I'll let other
people talk and then see if somebody
else comes up with another number. If
this makes it or doesn't make it,
whatever.
Okay. Um, just so I can go down. Um,
Kim, did you want to add anything?
I I think that, you know, leaving it
with what Liz suggested is it's still
going to allow the hiring of new
teachers, paras,
um, and things will, you know, just go
on status quo at the school. I I don't
think it'll hurt the children, the
families, or anything. I I I think the
taxpayers
spoke. I I think it's a fair a fair
change to make right now. Yeah.
So my point is Louise,
I just like to hear from everybody, then
we'll come back if we could. So yeah, I
think it's just everyone's got an
opinion, I think, on most of these, so I
just like to make sure. Yep. Go ahead.
Did you have a comment? Yeah, I agree
with both Kim and Liz. Um, I think we
need to do something here and the town
has spoken. Um, and I do feel that this
the school will can deal with that at
this point with the extra money
and that's it. I agree with that. And
Joanne,
thank you. Yeah, I'm glad we can finally
comment on this in public and there's
been a lot of um conjecture and uh
probably my first time speaking out loud
um about it. I think from the beginning
we all thought it was a big ask. I think
we've all, you know, had our opinions
that we've never seen such a big ask
before. You know, we listen to
everything. Um I'm more of a dollar
amount person. So, I would rather see
like can we and I'll shut my thing down
and figure out the calculations of you
know I know I believe I have a a
brochure
um that said that the first increase and
I hope I can find my page was oh is it
381,097 and that was what they were
asking for with their
8.8% increase. Yes. So 381096.
Oh okay. Maybe I round it up. Thank you
Liz. So if we are looking can we know
what the 3% you know how much would the
3% be? Less than half. Right. So what
what would the increase be? Um from
right there the dollar change is 3%.
It's 130,441.
All right. So that's a 3%. Thank you.
you know, myself, I'm I'm going to be
torn on this. I I'm going to be thinking
about it through and through. Um, I know
that this year the board has, you know,
shown the propensity of trying to, you
know, I've been on the board of finance,
others have just joined it. I've been on
the board of finance for four years. So,
I know that it's always been a difficult
decision or conversation every year. We
know there's been surpluses and things.
This was the first year that I I thought
we made inroads with um working with the
board of ed as far as you know creating
the capital fund account knowing there's
a lot of work that's going to be done
there. I also was a big fan of if there
was going to be a surplus, let's figure
out a way that it can go back into the
school and be productive, which I think
happened this year. I'm not I'm not
saying there wasn't a big surplus and
that you know the figures have shown
that
um and I I you know the people have
spoken so we have to make a cut. I just
have to do some fast math that I'm very
famous for to see what I would be
comfortable with cutting because my
intention was always going to be to
suggest a cut, you know, as far as to
that budget. um that hadn't changed.
That you know was a big ask like I'm
saying publicly right now. Um and you
know we've got to listen to the people.
I just want to make sure that they you
know they've showed a lot of propensity
to work with the whole town together.
We're trying to come together with
getting a lot of the the capital
projects done. So I just want to feel
comfortable with the overall cut and
then move forward. And we also have as a
board of finance sent emails that we
wanted to have a little bit more
financial information and hopefully that
can be worked on in the future as well.
Um, so I know you're going to call for a
vote quickly, but I just I need a few
minutes to do a little bit of mental
math for myself, but thank you. That's
my two cents. Okay, Liz, did you you
want Yeah, while you're while you're
doing your mental math, I just wanted to
say so the school is not in a position
where there's mandatory
uh hirings needed. Um this I think the
school has a policy that once the
classes reach 30, I don't know if that's
a state law or not, that they would want
to increase. And and I totally get that.
I wouldn't I wouldn't support having
classrooms of of 30 children. Um, but
they're not anywhere near a mandate
where they need to hire. They want to
add a teacher for the large fourth grade
class, which is absolutely makes sense
because there's
uh the to I think there's 36 kids.
Um, and then there's a class of 28 and a
class of 27. Um, so it's not it's not to
the point of a mandate. And then but
coming up behind those classes, there's
classes of 22 and 23 and I think 21. And
when the discussion happens about this
growth of the school, the growth in the
school is mostly due to the preschool.
And we need to talk about that. and
Maguire even suggested that we need to
talk about this because they are now
have opened this up to non-andover
students and that is where the growth is
coming in our school and that shouldn't
scare us into thinking that we should
you know consider a bigger increase than
maybe necessary. Um the fact is that
surplus that was in the budget still
lives in this budget. It doesn't go
away. So if you look at what was
expended last year compared to um this
year or next year, I had these notes
written down and I I don't know what I
did. Oh, wait. Here they are.
Um bottom line is that that increase or
that surplus is still lift. It will
compound year-over-year. That increase
will stay in the budget as long as the
budget continues to get built on current
um budgeted amounts versus considering
the um expended amount.
So, I'm I'm hoping we can do it for 3%
because, you know, it is what it is.
everybody will have a say and um you
know obviously we all have to come in
you know to some sort of a an agreement
but I just wanted to clear up some you
know
some narratives that that we're we're
looking at um a position where positions
are going to be mandated does not appear
to be based on the information that I
received from
AES and this 3%
would allow them to hire the teachers
that they would need. Um, considering
the fact that that surplus still lives
in the
budget. That's my that's my take.
Okay. Anybody else want to add anything?
I just want to add more if you go ahead.
Y I just wanted to just say that, you
know, um I'm a newer board of finance
member, but this decision it's it's not
easy to make. um you probably couldn't
find anybody who cares more about kids
and education. Um this is just a it's a
very complex decision. Uh combing
through a budget, looking at information
that you're given and working with that
information to make a decision based on
the entire town and the population. So
for me, it's it's it was hard. It's
hard. Um, I I love kids. I completely
respect the education process at Andover
Elementary School. They're wonderful
teachers and it's it's not easy, but I
do think that this is fair.
Okay. Thank you. Anybody else? Yeah, I
want to say something, Louise. Yeah, I
appreciate all the the work that Liz has
done into this. um she's gone through a
lot of different venues as far as
figuring out getting all this
information and um it's come out and I
think it's time that we do something
about it.
Just wanted to call it that um
uh Mr. maker. I forget his name, but
he's on board. He just put up a note and
said something to the effect that the 3%
mandatory increases for those teachers,
I think it said it wouldn't cover the 3%
wouldn't cover those increases. So
again, I'm just want to make sure
everybody caught that note that he
they renegotiated the teacher contract.
So yeah, the contract has that increase.
So he said the 3% will not allow for any
staff to be hired. So that's you
basically eat that with the salary
increases that have been negotiated,
right? So, I I still hold my position. I
think the 3% is is too much of a cut and
we're not going to be to hire the
teacher for the class of 36 people. Um,
so I I I hear you, Liz. I hear everybody
else and on the phone. I just think
that's a little too steep uh to still be
able to hire a teacher that's needed and
support the salary increases that are
mandated. So that's my final thought on
that.
Really quick, can I just add one more
thought? You know, as regards surpluses
that EAS has managed to bring in over
the last couple uh of budget cycles, I'd
be careful. I mean, I always think it's
difficult to to to count on grant grant
money. And I think this year in
particular is a very dubious time to be
counting on grant money. Mhm. Uh we've
had a good track record, but there are
reasons, and I don't I'm not going to
elaborate. I don't want to start a
fight, but there are reasons to think,
hm, is our great money coming? So, I'd
be real I'd be more cautious than I
otherwise might be on that issue with
looking at last year surplus and saying,
"Oh, that could happen again. There's
slack in this budget." So, that's one of
the reasons I'm opposed.
Okay. Anybody else have any comments or
can we Mark can I can I just go ahead to
be voting on this motion? But it I mean
we're all taking a deep dive and really
coming within oursel because we know the
people have spoken. We know that the the
board of ed budget has been you know a a
a source of contention year after year
you know with everything that's
happened. So I I is it proper for me to
and we knew we would probably come to
this point if the budget didn't pass,
but I would love to know Rob's idea just
to throw it out there. I know we can't
vote on it, but he said he had an idea.
I wanted to know because I know he's
fully ingrained in what would his
compromise situation be or what was his
thoughts? Are we allow because we're
going to be doing big votes on all of
this. So, so you're seeing what kind of
discount or what kind? It's hardly
rocket science. I was going to say that,
you
know, 6% is is a rough midpoint. Um,
instead of the 3% 6% increase, so
instead of 8.8 or three, kind of in
between the two. Uh, that's still, you
know, that's still I think it's about
$120,000 from what they asked. That's
not insignificant. And at the same time,
I don't think it's crippling. Um, so you
know, I don't, and I have to admit, you
know, we're we're just basing we're just
going on their overall budget here. The
BOE would have to then sort out how
they'd handle that cut, right? Um,
again, I think the bud the the election
results
were in context do not suggest that we
need to make such a big cut. And so I
would propose a midpoint kind of deal
like that if this motion fails.
I appreciate you speaking to that. I
know I'm a little concerned. I
definitely know that we have to cut
tonight. I mean, the people have spoken
and that was loud and clear. I just want
to make sure that we make a fair cut
this year. I think we made inroads. I'm
not sure what that fair cut is. So, I
wanted to hear what Rob was saying.
Um, you know, a lot has been brought up,
but I also feel like our relationship
with them has brought a lot of inroads.
So, I think we should follow through
with and pursue for everyone that has a
lot of questions on the financial
reporting and, you know, maybe ask for a
little more information, find out where
other cuts can be made or whatever. So,
yeah, I'm on the fence with this, too,
as far as thinking, you know, going from
an 8.8 eight down to a 3% is just too
much at this time. Um, you know, but
opening
would you feel better cutting that eight
and a half in half? That's I was more
going that way, the four and a half%. I
just I know that this has to be done and
so I appreciate the honest and open and
finally we're allowed to talk about it.
you know what we would do or what we
would think so that people will know
that.
Um so yeah, I didn't want to go as deep
as three. I understand that there's been
a lot of things brought up, a lot of
literature and a lot of things, but I I
want to work together and and you know,
come to a
fair fair point. So Liz, could we maybe
just round it out at five? That's your
4.4 and Rob 6%. Maybe we go at five and
call it a day. Something like that.
Well, just just as a point of order.
Yes, we gota I know we gota vote on
this. We have to vote on this motion. So
yet, but I if I could comment. So, one
thing I want to point out is that if we
were to leave this decrease in place,
and I have to verify and make sure I
don't leave any weird rogue numbers
around, but we're actually reducing the
amount to be raised by
taxes at a time when we all know
inflation is 3 to 5%. Exactly. Wait,
what exactly are you saying, Mark? I'm
so sorry. I'm not following that.
When we look at this, when we take a
look at this, we're actually reducing
the amount to be raised by taxes versus
last year,
which is a good thing.
We have inflation, Joanne. We have
mandatory.
Oh, wait. Guys, I had the floor. Okay, I
had the floor. So, let me if I could
just tell you talk about what my what my
view would be. Yeah. So I think three is
a deep 3% increase is a pretty
deep, you know, it's 3%. It's an
increase, right? But it does, you know,
does take us into a tax reduction. Now,
part of that is driven, uh, you know,
maybe by the fund balance. So, we have
to recognize that that we're using some
of the fund balance, but I think we also
recognize that we're probably okay doing
that. Um, personally, I wouldn't, you
know, I think that's I'd like to see a
little more than a 3% increase. So cut
from the original budget would be less.
Um, you know, and if we remain flat,
it's hard to see how people would argue
with that. If we did not increase taxes
for the town of Andover, it's hard to
see how that would be problematic.
Eric, you have your hand up. Do you want
to add something?
So, obviously I don't have a vote in
this, but the the hardest thing I think
in your jobs right now is balancing a
budget that will get through a town
meeting and then we'll get through a
referendum.
Um, and I can say if you
propose that big a cut to
AES, you'll get the parents all out to
the budget meeting. Um, and it will get
sent back to you and you'll be here this
week because that's what happened the
last time we did this. Um, that's just
an observation for what happened in the
past. I can't tell you what the truly
correct number is or should be. Um,
education budgets not my forte anyway,
but I think if you went with a 3%
budget, you would have a very hard time
getting that through the next public
meeting.
Um, you know, yeah, that's all I got.
And I I I read the charter and I thought
the charter said the next time we go
together to present it to the town, it
is just presented and
no changes are made. I It's the same
process. People get to vote on it.
Um, but did we vote the last time? I
thought that they changed the charter
that there is a meeting, they're allowed
to make changes but only go lower and
then it just swoops over to the
referendum. I thought that was our new
charter cuz I thought we took away
voting on it at the end, but I could be
incorrect.
I I don't think that's the way. It's
it's not the most clear language in the
world, but what it says is that you know
if the referendum if the if the budget
is defeated at first referendum or for a
second time at town meeting, the budget
would be bifurcated into separate votes
on the town budget and on the local
board of education budget individually
and the process shall begin
again with the board of finance as set
forth in section
803C which is what talks about the
um passing the budget at the town
meeting
um above and shall continue until each
bifurcated budget is
passed. So that's the town meeting. Oh,
so we're on to a new because we
definitely same same process just
bifurcated and the board of financial
review any rejected bud budget and
present for review and discussion only
the same or revised budget to a
subsequent town meeting held exactly one
week after the day of the referendum at
which it was rejected and then extra
referendum will be held exactly two
weeks later. If only one of the two
bifurcated budgets is passed at
referendum, it is final and may be
implemented for the new fiscal year.
This process must continue for any
failed budget until it is passed. Okay.
So, I think it's the same process, but
if we go to town meeting and we pass the
town budget, that's done. That'll go to
referendum, but we still need to go have
another town meeting to pass the
education
budget if it were to fail at town
meeting.
And and I I think Eric is right. um
rejected. We need to consider
um the ability to pass this from both
sides. Mhm. And the
um you know, and just a reminder, if if
it comes in high, people can always
reduce it at town meeting. Didn't happen
last time, but it can happen. That is
the motion that can be made. Cannot be
increased. It can only be reduced.
Um, Joanne, you got your hand up? Did
you Oh, no. I'm not trying to. Is my
hand up? Sorry. Chuire has his hand up.
Um, I don't know. Yeah, I'd like to
understand it just because everything's
so new. Thank you. Yeah.
Um, go ahead. Go ahead, Jeff. As far as
the charter change goes, it's the exact
same
process. The It's true. that's
bifrocated, but you still go to a town
meeting. The town
meeting only has a vote to pass it to
referendum. They don't have a they're
not voting on the budget there. They can
vote on um decreasing the budget as Mark
said, but he said too, if it doesn't if
there's no reductions to the budget or
whatever is reduced is what will go to
referendum. Mhm. goes to referendum at
that point in the time. We do need to
You don't vote on it like we used to
vote on it. We used to vote on it where
we would vote it up or down and you know
right from town meeting it would be
pushed back to the board of finance. But
that's not what the new process is. The
new process is it goes to a town
meeting. It can be reduced but then it
moves to referendum for the vote to
determine if it comes back to the board
of finance
again. That that is the new process.
That is what Thank you. That's the way I
understood it, Jeff. Thanks for
clarification. Thank you, Jeff. I I have
a comment. Go ahead, Louise. Uh looks
like Eric Becker said something about
contractual obligations and benefits are
100,000.
So, I'm I'm thinking if if that's true,
um what would the
percentage the lowest percentage we
could actually allow to Yeah, that's
lower than we were trying. I know. To
have that actually go through.
Do you know what I'm saying? Yes.
Yeah. I think he's just giving us
feedback to factor. He's just giving us
finance meeting throwing different
numbers into us to take into
consideration.
Right. And it's this is I just want to
make sure to finance meeting. Yeah. I
just want to make sure that we're
allowing them to do what they need to
do, you know, without causing problems
at this point.
But that just struck me funny. That's
all. No, thanks. Other comments, Mark, I
just want to be clear. So, you're and
and I agree that and and I'm gonna stick
to it that I think maybe cutting right
now down to the 3% is is too much. Um
but you're saying that if we did that,
we'd be lowering the total tax
collected. That's what Yes. Yeah. I
mean, we'll validate this calculation,
but it looks like the total taxes will
go down about $139,000.
What if we did like like Liz had
suggested like well I don't know how
you're doing all these calculations
don't usually have to do it later.
Um should we factor in any does anyone
else want to factor in one of the other
suggestions like the 5% or the the 4.4
You want to know what 5% would be? Is
that Well, I guess that was one of the
figures that is that going to affect the
taxes collected.
Mark, if you want I have a spreadsheet
that
shows three through
8%. Um, just did Eric.
Yeah. So, there's five there's 5%. It
would be about a
$217,000
increase. the mill rate would be still
be a reduction in the overall taxes
again because we're using a more fund
balance this year um of about 52,000. So
now with that fund balance you mean
because we added in the extra 40 that we
should have you know we were making up
for last year. Gotcha. Correct.
Yeah. All right. No, because I'm trying
to wrap my head around what you're
saying here and just see how significant
it is and it I I will get there. I
understand. It's a whole new angle that
I usually don't use.
So, I' I'd like to call for a vote on
the motion that's on the floor to if we
could if nobody has any any uh
disagreements. So, the the motion on the
floor is to uh set the AES uh board of
ed line item at 4,478,499.74.
All those in favor say I.
I. I.
Okay, that looked like Liz and
Kim. Kim
and Louise. And Louise.
Okay. And all those opposed?
Nay. Nay. Okay. So, I have Joanne,
myself, Rob, and Bill.
That sound right? Yes. Mhm. Okay. The
motion uh does not
pass. Okay. We can entertain another
motion. I'd make a motion that we
decrease the uh 8.8% down to a
5% increase this year for the AES
budget. So, you're proposing that we
with the number that you put up there
for 5%.
You're making a motion that we set the
AES uh budget at 4,4
565,000 and uh Yep. 469 469 461. Yeah,
I'll second for discussion. Okay, Joanne
seconds. We had a lot of discussion
already. Um just for it's buying time.
It's buying time. We can take a look and
see what that does. And again, that that
looks like it takes us to about a lower
amount by taxation by about $52,000,
right? Because that's we you had already
made that calculation during discussion,
right? Yeah. So, no change what that
does for a mill rate. It still increases
the mill rate, but again, that's because
of the change to the the way that the U
vehicles are are appraised. It doesn't
actually change the taxation. So, with
this budget, the taxation actually
continues to go down.
Can we go all the way down to the
bottom? Like increasing the just keep
going a little bit so we can all see.
That is everything right there. That's
it. Right. But I I'm just getting to the
bottom like I know you did.
But isn't there a total of expenses at
the bottom? Even lower mark. That's on
the main budget.
Oh, sorry. That's it. That ends right
there. I thought it did a No, no, that's
that's the mill rate. That's the mill
rate. This is the main for the town
operating budget, the percent increase
is 4.1%.
The mill rate increase is 4.1. No, no.
Everything's going so fast. We're all
over the place. No, no, no. That's
expenditure, but we also have revenue. I
made my page too big. That's why. I
apologize. That's why I wasn't seeing
it. I was able to My bad. Let me shut
off my camera. Give me a moment to take
this all in.
While Joanne's doing that, can I just
just chip in my two cents real quick?
Yeah. Um I I still personally think this
is is a little much, but you know, as
you all know, my proposal would would
have been a little higher, 6%. Um I
understand we're trying to find a
compromise. We're trying to feel our way
to getting to a compromise. I'll just
point out again, you know, of of the
money so far, our net result tonight,
you know, we're we're in a positive
90,000 and that's ECS money. So, you
know, I am I am I love the idea of
bringing the town a flat budget, you
know, flat taxation, flat mill rate. Um,
but this actually goes past that. Um, I
think if we did mine, I think we'd
probably be almost exactly at zero. So,
that's my take. M if I could speak I I
don't
think I think this is a nice compromise.
I think it's more than half. You know,
we're not cutting it in half. I like
that bill proposed the 5%. We heard
earlier tonight by some of the board of
ed people um saying that they had heard
different towns had passed a 5%
increase, which is generally more than
any town. You know, I work for a board
of ed. You usually don't hear of these
numbers. But if it this is indeed the
year that they do need to support, you
know, new staff and um sorry, I thought
my camera was on more staff and
different changes that they have
outlined. I think this budget could be
passable. I think if we go any higher,
it's not going to be passable. And Mark,
you brought up the points of why it
might not be a good idea, you know, to
go too low. I'm I'm perfect. I'm
thinking that senior
citizens will be happy with this kind of
budget. You know, like you said, it's a
tiny increase in the mill rate. Um, it's
actually a reduction. It's actually a
reduction. Why am I looking at 31.46 and
31.59? Well, remember the mill rates
calculated based on the grand list and
the grand list went down because they
lowered the value of vehicles. It was
the change the way they shifted
sometimes. the calculation of the tax
rate. But is that the mill rate that
we're going to be taxing people on? Yes.
Is that the mill rate that we're taxing
people on? The mill rate is only one
component, right? That the valuation is
the other component, right? Valuation
change is your actual tax bill. What
we're trying to show here is that your
actual tax bill would drop will go down
Joan, right? Even though higher slightly
high, you know, teeny tiny, but I think
we're going to have win-win. we've done,
you know, we've shown that there's been
surpluses all around. You know, we're
doing good things with the surpluses.
You know, we found avenues for that to
go. Um, you know, we've we've put, you
know, there's still increases in
expenses. We really everything that I
motioned to cut wasn't cut. So, we're
not and we've added money back in
tonight. We would be cutting the board
of ed. I understand that. But from the
get-go, the board of ed has been a
contentious point where people were
asking us to cut that all along. That's
all we heard. So, I feel like we're at
least not cutting it more than the 50%.
So, that that's my take. I don't know. I
I understand you're all concerned in
different different ways. Let me if I
could let me do go down and make sure
everybody So, Rob, I think you spoke to
this. Um, Bill, you have any comments?
I'm all set. Okay, Kim.
I'm all set. Thank you. Okay, Louise.
Um, I'd like to see more of a
half. Um, for me that I feel that's a
good
compromise. So, that would be what?
4.4%.
Yeah. Increase. Well, again, keep in
mind it can always be reduced at the
time at the Right. Right. I'd be more
inclined to vote on something like that.
To me, five is a little bit too high.
Okay. Uh Liz, you have anything more to
add?
Um, yeah. I mean, for
me, five is high, but I certainly don't
want to go higher. Um, and I understand
that we all have to come to a
compromise. So,
um, I get
that. I appreciate the discussion.
Question. Yeah. you I would actually put
myself in that camp also. Um but I mean
we're already at a tax reduction so to
me to you know maybe I'd put back that
town a road money but or not town a road
but the but we're doing the job we're we
set out to do. You know we're supposed
to have these discussions. Yeah. Well
the thing that's really the thing that's
really driving the better the improved
situation you know we're still seeing a
significant increase on both the town
and the school side of expend
expenditures. So we got to keep that in
mind. What we're seeing is that we had
an improvement in revenue. So we don't
know if that's always going to be the
case. So you know I'm again I'm not
inclined to you know I think we're
fortunate because we've had this revenue
increase. The educational cost sharing
might get taken out again next year. You
know we may not see the collections as
quite as strong on the uh and the uh
overdue taxes. There's a lot of things
that could happen. So, you know, I I
think we're just fortunate this year if
we could do this. Yeah.
Call a question or Yeah. I've said my
piece. You all know where I stand. So,
take a vote. Anybody else? Yeah. I'm
gonna I'm going to go down again just
roll call because it's too complicated
and confusing trying to do that. And
this is this is the 5% proposal,
correct? Yeah. So, just to just to
clarify what we have before us is a
motion to set the AES board of ed budget
at
Um, whoops. Sorry, wrong screen.
I clicked off the uh I have two two
spreadsheets and the charter open and
everything else to set the AES
budget
at four I'm sorry
4,565,461 that's an increase of
$217,400 roughly.
uh and about a 5% increase over the
current year
budget. So, uh
Joanne, what's your vote?
Okay. Um based on I don't think we could
pass a higher amount than that. That
would not pass higher.
I Yes. Yes. Also, okay, Liz,
I.
Uh, Louise,
I'm on the fence, but I'll say I.
Okay. Uh, Kim, I'm on the fence, too,
but I'll say I.
Rob, I'll stick to my guns and say nay.
Okay. Um and I will say I even though I
would not like seeing a little lower.
Okay, motion passes. The uh AES budget
is set at that amount.
Okay. Do we have any other proposed
changes to the budget?
That is a good
budget. Let's take it to the town.
Mark, when we're done this evening, will
you be sharing that with all of us?
Yeah, I probably need to clean it up and
just make sure. Yeah, once you're Thank
you for taking the time to do that,
right? Yeah. Make sure that's propagated
properly. We're looking at a mill rate
of three, a proposed mill rate of 31.59,
right? Okay.
Correct. Yeah. The mill rate will be
Yeah. heavy set. But yeah. Mhm. And then
down the total raised by taxation is
a there it is negative half a percent.
Negative and a half percent. About
50,000 reduced. Yeah. I mean it's it's
you know functionally it's zero. Yeah.
Bill, should we throw any more money?
Okay.
Now you understand the fun. I don't have
to paid that cut. Come on. Let's just
call it a good night. Let's Yeah, I'm
just teasing.
Such a pain. I make the motion to
adjurnn. Well, wait. Let's Are we So,
can we Can we Is there another round of
public speak usually or I can't
remember. Not on the agenda. No. Okay.
That's only for that one meeting, I
guess. We Well, to me, I think the real
the real public comments going to come
during the town budget meeting, but
that's true. It wasn't on the agenda. I
just wanted to ask Eric, what are what's
our next process? Um, it all came so
fast with the referendum yesterday. I
think it was said earlier that we have
another town meeting next Tuesday. Am I
right on that? That is correct. The next
town meeting will be Tuesday at 700 p.m.
in the AES gymnasium.
Thank you. Thanks, Eric. Can I Can I
make a question? Can I go ahead, Louis?
Um, I'm just
curious as far as the actual town
meeting.
Um, is it I'm not sure if it's legal or
whatever. Are children supposed to be
there at the
meeting or I I know some people were
distracted by the kids at the last
meeting. How you going to have kid
parents come to a meeting, a public
meeting if they got to get you out? I
mean, you got to be kidding. Yeah, I
don't think I don't think you
restricted. Excuse me. As a parent of
young children, are you kidding me right
now? What?
[Music]
Yes, they're allowed to be there. I
think it's I think it's up to the Can
they be restrained? Not restrained.
Well, I think it's up to it's up to the
moderator to have to manage the the
meeting in terms of of the activity. So
people who are speaking out of terms,
people are making too much noise, you
know, he has the ability to address
those concerns. Yeah. And that would be
the appropriate thing I think. If he's
not do if he or she is not doing that,
can someone make a not a notion, but can
they speak up at the meeting and say,
you know, it is being distracting? Yeah,
I would I would say you'd probably want
to Okay. pass a note to him first and
then see I'm just letting you know that
some people talked to me about it and
they said that was very distracting for
them. It was I I think it's it's
probably it's probably something that
could be mentioned to the mo to the
moderator kind of off to the side and
then he could be made aware of it just
in case. Well, hopefully parents would
would, you know, not police, but yeah, I
didn't think it was too bad actually,
but yeah, if the children are acting up,
they can just take them outside or in
the hallway kind of like in church as
well, something like that. So, yeah. I
thought they were awfully well behaved.
I don't know what people are talking
about. I
didn't. Anyway, I think I think that's
true. Let's focus on the budget if we
could. Does anybody have anything else
to add? Well, that is part of the
budget. Yeah, it's part of the process.
What's going on? I get it. Yeah. I just
Okay. Something we don't really control.
So, yeah. So, basically when we go to
the town meeting, it will be a
presentation to present the budget to
show people the budget. People could
make a motion to cut further. Correct.
And then that goes to the referendum.
No, it would be voted on right then and
there. Then and then whether that
passes, Liz, then it would go to the
actual town vote. Right. Right. Okay. So
it doesn't my reiterating. Just make
sure we have a full understanding to the
town hall. There's no more back and
forth back here. Whatever it ends up
with that day goes to referendum. Got
it. All right. And furthering. Okay.
We'll cross our fingers. Okay. Yeah.
Furthering her question, are we because
it's bifurcated, there's two different
votes. Is that what's happening? Yes.
Yes. Okay. Thank you. And I'll update
the presentation to try to make that as
clear as possible. So, you know, we'll
present one, you know, one group and
then the other group and, you know,
well, we'll we'll talk about them and
we'll talk about the total, but I think
then the vote would be, you know, it
would be clear that, okay, we're going
to vote on this one. This is the number
we're proposing. But it'd be important,
I think, too, Mark, to show not only
both separate, but combined what it
means for the town overall. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Absolutely. We they got to know
that, right? That's they got to know
what the impact is. Yeah. Okay. I think
this is the first time this has actually
happened, right, since that? Yeah. This
is a new this Yeah. Yeah, it is. Yeah.
So, it's going to be interesting.
Louise, do you have something? No, I'm
good. Okay.
And final question for Eric. I'm sorry.
I know we want to close. So, we'll have
the town meeting and then the next
referendum. Is there a certain amount of
days we have it after that second town
meeting? I believe the next referendum
is May 27th.
Um, which is the day after Memorial Day
weekend. Um, and then it failed on the
7th. Um it would be June 3 would be the
next budget meeting and the next
referendum would be the 17th. So we
basically have two more failures or one
failure in a pass before the board of s
board of finance has to set an actual
mill rate without an approved budget. So
that's basically what you're working on.
Thank you. Thank you. I do have another
question. Um, at the referendum, if if
you're not able to make it, do they have
absentee votes?
Not at the referendum, but at the actual
vote you would, I believe. Well, the
vote is the referendum. That is the
referendum.
Yeah. So, if you know you're not going
to be
there, can you make a can you get an
absentee vote?
I believe so, but I am not the registar,
so I don't know. I don't want to give
you a definitive answer on that. That
would be a a Linda Derek or Wally Barton
question. Hey, it's Linda. Oh, I just
figured out how to unmute. Hello. Um,
yes, there are absentee ballots. Nice.
Thank you. You're welcome. Thanks,
Linda.
Okay. Do we have further discussion or
does somebody want to make a motion to
adjurnn? I'll make a motion to adjourn.
Second. Louise, do you want to second
that? You
I'm sorry. Yes. Okay. Any discussion?
All those in favor say I. I. Any
opposed?
Any abstensions?
Good job, everybody. Thank you. Yeah, I
think uh I appreciate the work
complicated thing and uh it's fraught in
many ways. So appreciate your
participation and your uh your efforts
and uh we'll see you next week and see
what happens.